# Recusion

All right, welcome back everyone to Programming for Networked World. Today, we're going to be exploring the topic of recursion. Recursion is sometimes considered a difficult topic, but I want to show in this video that it's really not so bad at all. So, ready to explore recursion? Ready to explore recursion? Oh, did I say that already? Let's get going.

Okay, here's what we're going to do today. We're going to build a project that computes factorials. So, for those of you that remember factorials, factorials are the product of an integer combined with all the integers that came before. So, for example, a factorial of 3 is 3 times 2 times 1, which is three times two is six, and six times one is six, so the factorial 3 is 6. We're going to make two programs that compute factorials. We're going to do it the traditional way with just a loop, and then we're going to redo it as a recursive function or using a block that employs recursion.

All right, so how do we do it the traditional way? Let's get started with that. So, I'm going to make a block over here and I'm going to say make a block. I'm going to go over to the operator here, and then we're going to pick a reporter. I'm going to call this, let's call it "Loop Factorial of n," and we'll create that. Then I'm going to click here to make n an input that takes a number. Okay, and that should be good. So, say okay. I'm going to bring this over here and open it up a little bit more so we can see this whole scripting area. All right, so the first thing that we need to do is make a variable. So, let's make a variable here called "result." That's going to be the result that we pass out of this function or that we report, and then we want to start a loop. So, let's go up to control and let's get a "for" loop here. Now, we want to loop as many times as there are integers in a number that are previous in the sequence going down to one. So, from here, we'll just count up because this is commutative we can go either direction. We're going to count from 1 to n. So, n will be, for example, 3, then we'll do one, two, and three. Okay, and now we just need to think about what we want to compute. So, we need to get a "set" block here. I'm going to set this. Now we're going to set the result to, and here we're going to get an operator to "i," which is going to be 1, 2, 3 times result. Now, if you look at this right here, we're going to have a bug because "result" is going to be initialized to zero. So, we need to remember that if we're going to initialize it to 1, we need to tell it so explicitly. So, we're going to say, set "result" to 1. Otherwise, everything multiplied by zero would just end up being 0. And then at the end of this, we want to report. Let's see, under control, we want to report our result. All right, so let's get that and pull down "result," and that should be it. So, let's give it a try. Now, remember, it disappears because it's now under custom "Loop Factorial," and we can try three, and the answer should be 6, and it is. Five should be 120, and it is. You go up to 10, and it gets to be a much bigger number, but that is the correct result. So, we built a function that computes factorials. Great! Now, how do we do this in a recursive way?

So, when you're thinking about recursion, the fundamental idea is that you create a block that calls itself as part of its solution. And in order to do that, you need to make sure that your recursive block has two cases: one's called the base case, and the other is called the recursive case. And you want to make sure that when you're computing, your recursive case is tending towards the base case and will eventually reach it. Because the base case controls when the recursion ends, and if you never get to the base case, then you'll just keep going over and over in a circle, and eventually, your program will produce something called a stack overflow or some kind of error that runs out of memory or space.

That might seem a little abstract, so let's just put it together in a practical example. So, we'll make a block here, and we're going to take this. It's going to be an operator again, and we'll call this "Recursive Factorial of N," and it will be the same as the other. We're just going to turn "n" into an input for a number. Here we go. Let's get a number here. All right. And again, let's just make a little bit more space and start building up. So, again, with a base case and a recursive case, the best way to handle this is probably with an "if-then" expression or an "if-then-else." So, let's grab an "if-then-else," and the first thing that we're going to test is the base case. The base case is when we reach one. We don't want to go into zero because if we multiply, as I said before, anything by zero, it's going to be zero as a result. And we don't want to get into negative numbers. We probably should be testing the input on the way in to make sure that the input to start with is not negative, but we're trying to keep this example simple. If "n" is equal to one, then we're going to do something, which is we're just going to report. Here we go. Oh, I keep going to the wrong test. Okay, we want to go to report in now. You could also just report one because if "n" equals one, then you know the answer is one. But to keep it kind of nice and clean, we're going to report it else. So, this is the base case. Else is going to be the recursive case, and I might even just make comments here. So, let's just add something here. Let's say like a comment, and we could put it right there, and we can say "base case" just to make that totally clear. Then we can make another comment and put it down here. Oops, I guess it's harder to do with the else, so we'll just put it down here. Recursive case. Okay, so base case and then actually the recursive case here. So, we'll kind of just put off the side. That's the base case. This is going to be the recursive case inside the else. So, the recursive case has to call this function again but with different inputs. So, what would that look like? So, here, we're going to do report again. So, we're going to report, and that's going to help us to call this function. Now, you say, "Okay, I want to call this function again, but how do I like reach up and call it?" Well, you can go to "Custom" and actually pull this block back in. So, we're going to do that here. This allows us now to connect a recursive case. Good. And we're going to say "Recursive Factorial of" and here, what is it? It's not "n" anymore. It's going to be "n-1." So, let's do that because we're trying to move towards or converge on the base case. But there's one more thing that we need to do.

So, here we go. Recursive case of "n-1," multiply "n" times all the other numbers that are in the line of integers until we get to 1. And so, to do that, I'm going to take this multiplication here. I'm going to multiply this, and we're going to multiply this by "n." So again, you can see this here. We have the base case. If "n" equals 1, then we just report "n." Otherwise, we report "n" (which could be 3) times the recursive factorial of 2, and then that will recurse. And again, you'll have the same question: Is it going to be the base case? No, this time, it's 2, so then it's going to be 2 times the recursive factorial of 1. And then it's going to go through again and say, "Is it 1?" Yes. And so, it reports 1, and then it calculates 1 times 2 times 3, and you get your answer of 6. So, that's how recursion is done.

And let's just see if it works in practice. So, we're going to go over here to "Custom" again. We're going to bring over the recursive factorial, and I'm going to try again, 3, just to test it out. It should be 6, and it is. Let's test it out as 5. It should be 120, and it is. And then we can test, let's try 10. Now, you might say, "Like, okay, these are two ways of doing the same thing. Why would I even bother with doing recursion?" And the answer is, it depends on the context. In almost all the cases, with some very small sort of edge cases, you can always turn a recursive operation into a loop and vice versa. But sometimes it's more efficient to calculate something recursively, and sometimes it's even easier to program it because you're kind of focused on the logic of the problem rather than the looping operation and keeping track of the state of all those interim values. You kind of let the computer do that for you when you're doing recursion. Depending on your programming environment, doing a recursive function may actually be faster and more efficient.

So, let's just test this out here, very unscientifically, but I'm going to take a big number. Let's try 50 for both of these, and you'll see a noticeable lag. For example, when I run this, the first one calculates, and then we'll get it in scientific notation, but you can see that it took maybe a second. And we do the same thing here, and it instantly reports. I don't even know if we can get up to 100. Let's see if we'll go that high. You can see that it probably took about two seconds to calculate that, and again, with this function, it's more or less instantaneous. And we could keep going with that. Again, we're going to hit an upper limit where it won't be able to calculate this at all. We got to infinity, and we probably will reach infinity faster here. So, express train to infinity, there you go. But the point is, within NetsBlocks, sometimes recursion will produce faster results than the traditional way of doing things with looping structures.

All right, so that is our video for today. I hope that was a useful introduction to recursion, and I will see you in our next video.
