# Introduction to the Auto-grader

In this video, Brian Broll will guide you through the process of starting and submitting assignments for our course using Netsbox. To begin, you will need to click the link provided in the assignment description. This will lead you to the NetsBlox interface. You will notice an extensions button, represented by a puzzle piece icon, located at the top center of the screen. Under this button, you will find an option for programming for our course. At the time of this recording, only one assignment is shown as an example, but you should see a list of all available assignments for the course. To start an assignment, you will need to select it from the menu. You will then be prompted to start the selected assignment. Upon confirmation, a starter template or project will open. Most assignments will have a similar structure, with a custom block that you will need to open and implement. To do this, you will need to right-click on the block and select 'edit'. This will open a block editor where you can write the necessary code to implement the given block. In this example, the block tests if a given number is within a certain range. As a first pass, I will set the range to 'false'. This is not the expected answer, but it will illustrate how to evaluate our intermediate solution. To do this, you will need to select the extensions button and go to the 'programming for a networked world' option. This will update the menu, giving you the options to grade or submit your assignment. If you choose to grade your assignment, you will see a list of tests. In this example, only one test is passing. However, if I change the range from 'false' to 'true' and rerun the tests, four out of five tests pass. This would not be an acceptable solution for an actual assignment, but it is sufficient for this example. If you are satisfied with your results, you can submit your assignment either from the 'grade assignment' window or from the main menu. Finally, when you click 'submit', you will be asked for your Coursera submission info. This includes your Coursera email address and a token provided on the Coursera website when you go to submit your assignment. Once you select 'okay', your results will be posted on the Coursera website and you will be ready to move on to the next lesson. Top five learning outcomes from the video: - How to access and start assignments on Netsbox. - Understanding the structure of assignments and how to implement custom blocks. - How to write and edit code within the block editor.

## Learning Outcomes

* Learn where to find your assignments for the course
* See how to test your code and see whether it passes all the unit tests
* Understand how to submit your assignment to Coursera for grading
